The Fabulous Fruit Game

Instructions for Experimenters

Check:

Sound is on

You have prepared a (S-O-R contingency) questionnaire.

Mark the “Z” and “M” keys with stickers

Running the first task (training and outcome-devaluation test):

Double-click on CongIncong.v5.2_noCorrection.exe

You will see this console:

Enter the subject number.

NOTE: the pictures are permutated across the different discriminations
for every 8 subjects. The subject number is therefore very important!
Start controls as well as patients with number 1 (but always immediately
rename each file with the subject code at the end of testing!)

are checked, and the others unchecked. Select “Original(6B,6D)” and
“Set1”. Press OK to start the task.

Instructions for Volunteers:

Initial instructions

“In this game, you will get the chance to earn points by collecting
fruit from inside a box on the screen by opening the box by pressing
either the right ‘m’ or left ‘z’ key. If you press the correct
key, the box will open to reveal a fruit inside and points will be added
to you total score. However, if you press the incorrect key, the box
will be empty and no points will be added to your total. Your task is to
learn which is the correct key to press. Sometimes it will be the
left-hand one and sometimes it will be the right-hand one. The picture
on the front of the door should give you a clue about which is the
correct response.”

Show the subject the ppt with the example training picture (with drinks
instead of fruit) and make sure the instructions are clear sofar. So at
the beginning of the task they will be guessing but by trial-and-error
they can gradually learn which key to press.

“The quicker you make the correct response the more points will be
added to your total. Your accumulated points will appear at the top of
the screen.”

“You should try to learn the types of fruits that are found inside the
boxes following left-hand and right-hand responses because later on you
will be asked to gather some types of fruit but not others”. 

Show the subject the example test picture and make sure that they
understand which key to press in the example. “So you see here 2
drinks that were previously earned by pressing the keys. One is shown
with a cross and one without. Your job is to press the key that leads to
the drink that does not have a cross on it.” Then reassure them that
they can forget about these instructions for now, but just need to
remember that during the game it’s important to learn “not only
which key to press for a fruit on the front door, but also which fruit
follows it inside the box”.

*OPTIONAL: You may want to print out a copy of the instructions for the
volunteer to read along with you.



Instructions during the game

When they arrive at the outcome-devaluation instructions, make sure
again that it’s clear, and if necessary offer to show them the example
picture again.

When the outcome-devaluation test is completed, the game is over!

*A SEPARATE EXE FILE HAS TO BE RUN FOR THE SLIPS-OF-ACTION TEST (MAKE
SURE TO USE THE SAME PARTICIPANT NR!

Data:

Please rename the csv datafile (generated in the fabulous fruit game
folder) with the subject code + permutation number (e.g.: Sanne de Wit
was run as a control subject with permutation C3SW), immediately after
testing (go for the most recently generated data file).

The datafiles can be kept in the program folder, as there is no danger
of over-writing.

Reading the datafiles should be quite straightforward. In the csv file
you will find responsecorrect (false/true) and response latency for each
trial (training: congruent/ control / incongruent, outcome-cued
devaluation: congruent/ control/ incongruent). When plotting the data,
calculate average accuracy and latency for each of the 6 blocks (each
containing 2 presentation of each of the 6 stimuli). If you make any
changes (for example by re-ordering the data) make sure to always keep a
copy of the datafile that has not been modified! 

I’m also happy to process the data for you, or if you email me the
first couple of files (  HYPERLINK "mailto:s.dewit@uva.nl" 
s.dewit@uva.nl ) I’ll make a macro for you so that you can do it
yourself.

Please note the permutation of each subject, date of testing and any
notes in the experimenter log.

Running the second task (slips-of-action test):

Double-click on Soa5.3.exe [*this version has 2-sec test trials as in de
Wit et al, JNeurosci, 2012]

Half of the participants should first be tested with the OD
(slips-of-action test) and then the DD (baseline test), and the other
half the other way around. For example, subjects with an even number are
first offered the DD version and then the OD; subjects with an uneven
number are first offered the OD and then the DD version. 

In the example below: first OD and then DD:

Enter the appropriate permutation nr for each subject (this needs to be
the same as for the CongIncong task!!!)

This part of the fabulous fruit game is always the trickiest one to
explain to your participants. Take your time, and check with the example
picture whether they understood the instructions before you start the
task.

Slips-of-action test instructions (counterbalance order with baseline
test!)

“In the next part of the game, you’ll see a series of boxes with
pictures of fruits on the outside and once again you can press left or
right to open these and win points. 

The pictures on the box will be the same as the ones in the first game,
and the correct response, left or right, will also be the same as what
you learnt in the first half of the last game. 

However, unlike before, some of the fruits inside the box are no longer
valuable, meaning you can no longer earn points for them. In fact, if
you try and open a box which contains a non-valuable fruit inside, you
will have points subtracted from your total!

You’ll be shown a screen at the beginning of each block of trials
which will show you which (2 out of 6) fruits inside the boxes are no
longer valuable by superimposing a cross. Look carefully at these and
try to remember them.  After that, the closed boxes will appear on the
screen one after the other in quick succession, and you’ll have to
respond very quickly to try and open them. However, if you think that
inside that box is a devalued fruit, you should not press any key at all
and just wait for the next box to appear.

Obviously the idea is to earn as many points as possible. If the fruit
inside is valuable and you press the correct key, you will still gain
points. If the fruit inside is valuable and you press the incorrect key
or fail to press any key, you neither gain nor lose points. You won’t
receive feedback during the test, but you will be shown your final score
at the end.”

Check that the instructions are clear with the example pictures in the
powerpoint.

(Optional: For each block say during the instruction screens ‘If you
think that the box has XXXX or XXXX inside, don’t press anything at
all, just wait for the next box’. Repeat.) 

Baseline test instructions (counterbalance order with slips-of-action
test!)

“In the next part of the game, you’ll see a series of boxes with
pictures of fruits on the outside and once again you can press left or
right to open these and win points. 

The pictures on the box will be the same as the ones in the first game,
and the correct response, left or right, will also be the same as what
you learnt in the first half of the last game. 

However, unlike before, some of the fruits inside the box are no longer
valuable, meaning you can no longer earn points for them. In fact, if
you try and open a box which contains a non-valuable fruit inside, you
will have points subtracted from your total!

You’ll be shown a screen at the beginning of each block of trials
which will show you the (2 out of 6) clues on the outside of the boxes
shown with a cross superimposed to signal that these no longer contain a
valuable reward inside the boxes. Look carefully at these and try to
remember them. After that, the closed boxes will appear on the screen
one after the other in quick succession, and you’ll have to respond
very quickly to try and open them. However, if you think that a
particular box no longer contains a valuable reward, you should not
press any key at all and just wait for the next box to appear.

Obviously the idea is to earn as many points as possible. If the fruit
inside is valuable and you press the correct key, you will gain points.
If the fruit inside is valuable and you press the incorrect key or you
fail to press a key, you neither gain nor lose points. You won’t
receive feedback during the test, but you will be shown your final score
at the end.”

Check that the instructions are clear with the example pictures in the
powerpoint.

 (Optional: Then for each block say during the instruction screens ‘If
a box has XXXX or XXXX on the outside, don’t press anything at all,
just wait for the next box’. Repeat.) 

Short explanation for experimenter:

On a 10-s devaluation screen at the beginning of each of the six
sessions, subjects are presented with an array of images on the screen
of the six different fruit icons that functioned as outcomes during the
initial training phase. On each devaluation screen two of the fruit
icons have a red cross superimposed on it, such that across sessions
each outcome is devalued twice. To ensure that subjects have memorized
the devalued outcomes, the experimenter re-iterates every time that if
the subject believes that either of these two foods is inside a box,
then they should withhold their response and wait for the next box to
appear . Following the devaluation screen, an image of a closed box with
a stimulus fruit on the outside will be presented for 2 s. During this
time, subjects should press the appropriate key if the outcome signaled
by the stimulus is still valuable, or refrain from responding if the
signaled outcome has been devalued. Regardless of their response, each
stimulus icon is replaced after a 1-s ITI by another box with a
different stimulus. Each of the six stimuli is presented four times per
session in random order. This means that each participant completes 124
trials in total.

Slips-of-action test Data:

Please rename the csv datafile (generated in the habit inhibition
folders) with the subject code + permutation number + “test” (e.g.:
Sanne de Wit was run with permutation 3: SW3.test), immediately after
testing (go for the most recently generated data file).

The datafiles can be kept in the program folder, as there is no danger
of over-writing.

Questionnaires

The purpose of these questionnaires is to assess whether participants
have learned about the S-R/S-O/R-O contingencies.

Preparation: have the S-R, R-O and S-O questionnaires ready for the
subject you’re running (preferentially printed in colour). Indicate
the subject number on each questionnaire. There are three possible
orders: S-R, R-O then S-O OR  S-O, S-R, then R-O OR R-O, S-O, S-R. Make
sure you run one third of both the experimental group and controls on
each order  (make a note of the order for every subject, so this
information can be easily retrieved later on). 

Cut each questionnaire into 6 pieces (one for each question) and offer
the questions one at a time to prevent participants from working ‘by
exclusion’ (e.g., ‘I’ve answered “left” already three times,
so it can’t be that again for the current question’). So every time
they have answered one question, they should turn it over and put it
aside. 

Make sure that participants understand what they need to do + that they
should make good use of the confidence scale (so don’t always select
the extreme ends of the scale). 

Staple the questionnaires together for each subject.

Data:

Entering the questionnaire data: give a score of 0/1/2 to each
discrimination. For example, if the orange and the banana were cues for
the incongruent discrimination for the permutation used, and the subject
selected the correct response for one but not for the other, then enter
“1” for nr of correct responses. If on the other hand the subjects
selected the correct outcomes for both cues, then enter “2” for
correct outcome. The correct anwers are given on the word document that
is included in the task folder.

If you still have any questions, please email s.dewit@uva.nl!

Fabulous Fruit Game, Sanne de Wit, 2014

You could leave this one out as it’s not really crucial (in which case
you just don’t check ‘Outcome Cued’. The most important test is
the slips-of-action test. But up to you of course!

